---
title: Novelia
date: 2023-09-16 17:46:11 +0800
description: Novelia is the name of the site.
---

Novelia is the name of the site. What else do you expect, huh.

## Novelia Space is a space of concepts

Believe it or not, my envisioning of Novelia Space originates from the word *novel*. By then it was Project Novelia, a Interiors project that aims to help me read more novels. Well, apparently it failed.

Meanwhile, I was having an idea. To take a snapshot of my current system of thought, so that I can reference and compare to it later, and, if anyone who has lost their way stumbles upon it, provide some inspiration for them. That is the ultimate goal of what turns out to be Novelia Space.

Then I meditated for quite some time on its organization. How can a complex system of thought be flattened into one or several linear stream of words? In computer science we call that process serialization. So, one quick way of serializing ideas is by putting a structured index at the beginning (which we usually refer to as the 'contents' section), and we will end up with a *book*, with different chapters covering various aspects of thought. 

I initially followed this approach, but it was not long that I found out that I lacked both the proficiency and perseverance to handle the many intricate interwoven threads that constitute several fundamental conceptions. My system is far from complete and internal severances and contraditions are everywhere. Simply put, I am not ready for a book. 

Afterwards, I begin to seek alternative ways of serializing ideas. One day, when I was on a business trip, an idea occurred to me. Insteading of flattening ideas into a linear sequence while somehow preserving their relations, why not keep the original interconnected nature of ideas and record each of them as-is? Thing can be organized in relation to those basic building blocks of ideas: *concepts*. Better still, owing to the flexibility of the digital text formats we have today, we can easily connect concepts via links, effectively producing a *concept space*.

And yes, Novelia Space is organized around concepts.

## Novelia Space is very personal

Novelia Space is not Wikipedia or Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Everything in Novelia Space is personal. I do not strive to achieve complete objectivity. I just faithfully record my thoughts.

That being said, the ideas I record in Novelia Space are often my firmest convictions. I have always tried, to the best of my ability, to maintain the quality of my beliefs, and to (hopefully) provide nourishment to the minds who need it.

---

Anyways, welcome to Novelia Space!
